---
layout:     post
ref:		exu
lang: 		en
title:      "The side of Eshu"
subtitle:   "Music of the souls"
date:       2017-10-31 12:00:00
header-img: "img/exu.jpg"
---

Among all things I have not written about, what happened in the inner room of the *pai-de-santo*, already two months have passed, is the event I saved for longer. I find myself noting it down now, on the return flight, on the fold-out table under the reading light.

Y., her mom and I entered the kitchen escorted by one of the helpers - maybe a *filho-de-santo*. The room was poorly illuminated and not bigger than one quarter of the hall where we watched the transformations and the party. The *pai-de-santo* sit, drinking and smoking, on a wooden bench on the left, his eyes smiling. He made the three of us sit in front of him, on a similar bench. Y., Y.'s mom and I.

He serves us something to drink. I take the glass with both hands. He speaks with Y. first and with her mom afterwards. I wait silently.

\- And you?

\- Me?

He takes my hands into his.

\- Are you two dating? - he says pointing to Y.

\- No - we answer together - just friends.

He smiles, commenting on how strange it is that when a boy and a girl are together, everyone immediately thinks they are dating.

He asks about me. I introduce myself one more time. I tell him where I come from, that I am already working and that I do not study anymore. I tell him that I am travelling...

\- You came all the way from Europe! - he exclaims, staring at me with his smile - Nobody loves anybody over there, everyone is alone, everyone by themselves. People here know how to love. For this reason you came here: to look for people with an open heart! Your life starts now! Your life starts now!

---

We stayed at the *terreiro* for a long time after thanking the *pai-de-santo* and returning to the hall. The music had never stopped and the party was still on.

Invited by one of the embodieds, a plump and jovial woman, Y.'s mom joined the dances. Y. followed her too.

My tiredness was gone, maybe because of the *cachaça*. The *pai-de-santo* came out of the room again and called the embodieds one by one. Each one accompanied by their chant, the spirits left the bodies upon the touch of the *pai-de-santo*, who then helped the kids holding their head or their shoulders.

We ended up walking in circles around the central column that in the memory takes the shape of a white tree. The *pai-de-santo* travelled the circle blowing on everybody's head a fistful of white powder. The embodieds drunk water from an earthenware amphora in the middle of the room.

Finally, we hugged one by one. The song went:

*A whole-hearted hug is worth more than a blessing*

The girl whose beauty stroke me down hugs me twice. I look for the huge boy that offered us the *cachaça* in the half coconut shell. I feel like hugging an older brother.

Left is the side of Eshu.

---

I did not see the hole.

The bike run fast although I was breaking. Fixed gear allows you never to stop moving the legs or to stand on the pedals grasping the seat in between the legs to have more control, as I usually do downhill with the black foldable bike. The slope was not even closer to the city's steepest ones - built on hills that seem to have risen yesterday - but the wide avenue and the absence of cars and traffic lights allowed you to take advantage of the thrust.

The left hand, open to hold onto the break lever, was thrown off by the bump. The handlebar shook and, as a reaction, I squeezed the rear break.

I can only use the shape and position of the wounds to retrace what happened afterwards. I can just remember the rear wheel dangerously approaching the side of a parked car, and me hoping not to dent it.

Let's start from the survivals: I have nothing on the upper side of the body. Arms, hands and face are intact, showing that I did not fell on the asphalt. Damages are found immediately from the waist down: the left testicle was squashed between the thigh and the seat, maybe in the unlikely attempt to hold the bike using just the strength of the thighs while the pedals spinned madly, to the point that one of the first thing that I tell to the boy who comes to rescue me, blowing as a woman in labour, is: "I squashed my ball! Fuck, it hurts!"; the inner left thigh hurts with a stinging pain anytime it just touches the clothes and, after the ball pain is gone, its the one that worries me the most because I can't check it (when, one hour later, I will be able to take a shower it will reveal itself as just a burn); thighs and glutes are bruised having being hit by the seat, but there are no other cuts. The left knee has a series of almost-decorative tiny cuts, maybe where it bumped into the handlebar, if I had wore trousers they wouldn't even be there; on the right calf there is the biggest cut, a chipped torn wound the width of the leg, sliced by the metal pedal which also left other marks both on the calf and on the shin, directly on the bone line, as if it had tried to mangled it. The left foot is ok. The right one - on the other side - has all the inner face of the big toe exposed down to the flesh, with a dirty, white, red and black wound clearly caused by the contact with the asphalt - the foot acted as a break - and other smaller wounds, all on the inner side; the right sandal's cork sole is stained in blood under the big toe and the buckle tongue bent at a 45-degree angle, but survived - German manufacture.

I drop immediately on the sidewalk to stay out of the road and, while laying on my back, I command screaming to the closest walker, who stares dumbfoundedly at me: "Man, take the bike off the road!" After the groin pain has gone down and after reassuring the waiter and the street artist who brung me some water, I ask if they know of a fountain nearby where I can wash away the blood. "Go to the gas station over there!" they tell me.

I limp for one block until I reach it. Of the four busy attendants around the machines of the area, none seems to care about me. I ask one of them about the restroom, with some fear to thrash it worse than an operating room. He tells me to use the water pump. "Even better!" I say. The tap is half broken and the gush is irregular. There is no hose to sprinkle me on. I leave the sandals dry on a sidewalk next to the bike and I ask myself if AIDS virus survives under the sun in oil puddles.

I ask for disinfectant. I'm given some industrial liquid soap and some coffee powder to *estampar* the wounds. It burns like shit. I thank.

I make a call, I put the shoes back on, I get on the bike and move on.

---

I am still limping, the day after, coming home from my sunday ride, and I am still carrying the bike by hand: the rear tire made me walk after a noisy puncture four kilometers from a hellish overpass. I had my ride by bus anyway and now I am trying to find my way home from the neighborhood around the terminus. I recognize one of the slums when I see a young girl who sells cigarettes sit on a stool next to a traffic light. I move fast, try not to use the phone and I cut short when a bloke asks me how many gears the bike has. Fixed gear.

Disoriented, I reach a central crossroad. Next to me opens, on a concrete-paved block, what seems to be a movie set. There is some soul music screaming out of two lines of speakers in the background. In front of the dj, in random order, I see children, men, women, transvestites. A group in the middle of a concrete stage is trying a coreography. Among them, a curly-haired *mulata* with a deep slit on the long white skirt draws my attention. She's holding the phone and the wallet in her hands. Some of her mates are dressed up like extras from *The Blues Brothers*. Flared trousers, buckled shoes, hats... I glimpse many more others styled with a similar look in the rest of the square. Almost everyone is dancing - many are boasting steps that must have been studied for years. Most of the perfectly preened ones have around fifty or sixty years. I see a child who must not be in preschool yet studying the moonwalk in front of a transexual full of smiles who shakes the skirt bending the knee almost to the ground. A lot of curious, some jailbird faces, some missing teeth. I hold the bike tight. The sun is hitting on the facades of the two fat grey fascistoid buildings that towers over the square. The sky at the end of the thirty rows of windows is far away. Next to me an old man - who has nothing but a pair of flip-flops, a t-shirt and shorts - does not stop for a moment. The *mulata* is really beautiful.

I limp around the entire perimeter of the square. James Brown kicks in.

No way. 

I look around for a bit longer. I tie the bike to an old broken public phone.

I crawl limping to the first empty spot.

And I start dancing too.
