---
layout:     post
ref:		ending
lang: 		en
title:      "Testify"
subtitle:   "An approximate ending"
date:       2017-10-26 12:00:00
header-img: "img/ending.jpg"
---

Writing an ending is always an invention, for true writing implies testifying something that has already happened. Even a suicidal note - probably the extreme form of written ending - is a type of fiction. Nevertheless, I'll take this freedom that I'm being given and end this experiment as I wish.

I have already packed to weight the luggage and assess how much else I can carry. The action felt awkward as it displayed itself emptied of the usual symbolism. I look at my backpack, old and orange, slumped over the floor with no specific meaning, and I feel that we are bound by similarity and companionship. I am an old dirty bag, filled up for the wrong reasons, resting heavily on the floor. 

I started my journey looking for loss, for I knew that I was carrying around my own burdens and demons like an old skin. I entrusted myself to the journey and tried to commit with sincerity and dedication to my passions, hunches and obsessions. I embraced my fears. The return raises a new one. In truth: I can not return. I feared for a while that entering again the old city would bring me back to the hole of despair I condensed in the first pages of this blog. This is unlikely because I know now that that despair was a choice. 

I am not saved. The root of my actions is still unknown to me, and their outcomes often cause pain and sorrow to me and the ones who surround me. Upon this I have no control.

Still, there is a way: I can try the wiser of my wisdom and the strongest of my passions and hope for the best. Have faith - not in a supernatural order - but in my companions.

Here I was asked for directions at least half-a-dozen times. There is nothing in my complexion that distinguish me from another Latin American. I shall believe that my fellows share some of my pain, that they have no answer as I have none, and that - nevertheless - they follow or will follow a similar call: try your best, be kind, sincere and wise, forgive if you have the occasion, heal if you encounter a wound and say "I'm  sorry" whenever you are mistaken.

Yet another question arises: "Why no one of those human beings - that history, cults or legends have brung to our time as fully realized or illuminated - has ever written a single word?"

Will it be that a hint of damnation always hovers on the letters? If so, the method I seem to have found is no more than a trap and will leave me with nothing but the loneliness of the page and an empty soul. If that is the case, shall I at least leave behind a good story and shall others find a greater good by reading it an aknowledging my flaws.