---
layout:     post
ref:		y
lang: 		en
title:      "Y."
subtitle:   "Prelude"
date:       2017-09-06 12:00:00
header-img: "img/y.jpg"
---

Coming back from Mexico over ten years ago I passed through what has been - up until today - the worst crisis of my life. I suffered from sudden cries (that hit me mostly at the sunset), suicidal tendencies, doubts on my sexual orientation, ...

The first chapter of my undergraduate thesis had been rejected, my first love story was over, Milan was merciless, distant and inhumane as it has never seemed since then. I was nothing. I just wanted the pain to be over.

I was saved by a fistful of people. A women (a friend) gave my back some hope; the others put together the pieces, one for each. They chose me and fed me. They chose me when I was at my worst and they have not changed their mind since then.

For a long time I have considered all that came after that crisis as a second existence, roughly put together by patching up the pieces of the previous one: I was grateful for it, but its original form was lost forever and the current one did not fit me well anymore. Nevertheless, it still floats.

I went to Mexico with the vague expectations to find something extraordinary: an illumination around my own nature, the form of the universe and my place in this world; or some kind of supernatural, inexplicable event; a miracle[^1]. I was looking for something of this kind: proofs, clarity, a call.

The crisis was a totally unpredicatable response to my expectations. Now I feel that I was not ready for that response, and I imagine the raft on which I sailed since then as a makeshift mean that has prevented me from vanishing and has allowed me to live, one day at the time, those experiences that I needed[^2]. I had to find the necessary confidence and courage to truly listen to that response: I've surrounded myself with friends, I fell in love and made love, I've got back in touch with my family and my roots and I've procured myself a profession.

Today I go back to Latin America after over eleven years. This journey has demanded me a long preparation and a great amount of courage - not the courage to venture into places that in Europe are often synonyms of crime, instability and violence - but the courage to face what this journey represents.

My courage and my pride are in these words.

This blog is an open and direct question to that unsettling destiny that I feel I'm approaching, together with all of us, and that I tried to roughly display by dreaming the [Nullpunkt Manifesto]({% assign nullpunkt=site.posts | where:"ref", "nullpunkt" | where:"lang", page.lang  %}{{ nullpunkt[0].url | prepend: site.baseurl }}).

Now, I know that for most people these lines will not be enough as an explanation for my journey; and I know that the skeleton of the text will not work properly without the meat of a story. When declaring my decision to travel I have often received several winks about me reaching a potential "girl", therefore I will be honest: yes, there is a woman[^3]. I will call her Y.

***

The first time I met Y. we were dancing. I have no memories of the encounter. We met in front of the eyes of a common friend, in a ceremony circle in a field somewhere in the south of Europe.
Salúquia saw us dancing at the bonfire's antipodes, my arms wide open as an hawk sailing on the fire's waves; Y. weaving spirals of water and air. "I felt you in one another's dance" told Salúquia.

The altered state of consciousness has not left me with any picture of Y. beyond the fire. The second time I met her was when the fire was out, in a playful collective hug on the ground near the ashes, while the sun was already high. That day I left her in the arms of my friend Sal.

I have to jump a few months to get to the moment when I realized that when I was next to Y., my thoughts stopped. Without understanding a thing I told her: "I don't know if I have to kiss you or what..." - and right away - "Shall we meditate together?"

"Y. is a mirror" told me Salúqia one day. I did not know that she was a mirror by then. What I knew is that with her I **felt** with daylight clarity anytime that one of my action - no matter how insignificant such as a word or a look - was driven by fear. Speaking about it, Y. admitted that I caused her something similar: I was her mirror.

Two mirrors meditating one in front of the other by candlelight may cause a terrifying experience. During the first minutes I saw in the transfigured features of Y. the faces of witches, monsters and demons. I felt fear strong and solid in my stomach and I breathed deeply. Then mexican warriors and gods appeared and I smiled.
"Which planet are you from?" asked Y. in the end. We were laughing.

Ĩn a few hours I will get off the plain and I will take my first seven steps on the South American land, stretched and warm as a drum's skin put next to the fire, or a muscular and tanned stomach under the sun.

Then I will take seven more steps, and seven others, and seven more, until I reach Y.'s hug.

She will say to me: "Now you can cry".

[^1]: Since when I saw "Little Buddha" on the TV as a child I had dreamt to be recognized by a group of monks as the movie's protagonist.

[^2]: A rack is as good a metaphore as any other.

[^3]: There is ALWAYS one woman (or rather more than one) because the one who writes is a romantic unsecure opportunist.