---
layout:     post
ref:		seeds
lang: 		en
title:      "Seeds"
subtitle:   "Two eagles"
date:       2017-09-28 12:00:00
header-img: "img/seeds.jpg"
---

We walk in the darkness on dirt roads looking for a good place to better see the stars. The moon hasn't appeared yet. All paths seem to end in private properties. The idea makes me nervous. We end up going back to the same spot of the night before, this time by ourselves.

Y. feels home. The lights are not enough to really illuminate the roads and the starred sky is bright even from the village. Walking, my arm around her waist, I imagine the landscape in the obscurity. I remember and relive the discovery of darkness.

---

That afternoon, Y. told me what would be waiting for me if I left the village. Further on the landscape changes again: the *serrado* is replaced by the even drier *sertão*. I picture aproximately a monochrome desert.

\- They have recently discovered some cave systems in that area. The temperature and humidity of the mountain create a unique micro-climate. You enter the cave and find a jungle. There, the same plants that outside are barely surviving throughout their entire lives, fighting against very scarse water, explode showing incredible forms and colors. You can't believe it!

She tells me about the regional expressions used in books by João Guimarães Rosa - *sertão*'s writer - leaving me with the reassuring idea that those places have been narrated by a human voice.

I still have in my mouth the memory of the fruit.

---

After lunch, in the yard of the farm restaurant where we fed on watery portions of vegan lasagna while Nysso and Náiade described us their stories weaven with the one of the village, Y. handed me a seed, a kind of giant bean, dark and with a hard bark. During the last weeks she's made me taste every edible plant we met, including the unripe and tasteless ones.

She opens it. 

I check the content - a sort of yellowish floury nougat - with some suspicion. I eat anyway, as I do with everything. It has a bitter aftertaste and it dries my mouth out. W., one of Y.'s friends, tries to understand what it smells like. It takes me all the time of the trip back to the village to conclude: the skin smells like valerian, the pulp like yerba mate.

It is only at home that, from the internet, the name comes: the tree with dust seeds, that my three companions call with the indigenous term, in *náhuatl* is called *copal* - the same name of the resinous incense extracted from it and used in purification cerimonies. The same one which sugary smoke I tasted ten years before in the *zocalo* in *DF* before the *saumeador* pulled the thoughts out of my head, grabbing them in the middle of my forehead and extracting them like a paper streamer with a noisy and eloquent movement.

---

Náiade and Nysso's house has the same color as the earth that sustains it. When I ask to know its genesis, Nysso speaks to me about *adobe*, *pau-a-pique*, *hiperadobe* and other terms I understand very little. Inside, I touch a reddish wall where you can clearly see the monochrome weft of tiles and earth.

We are six. The fat labrador Aspárago stayed out near some bushes of what Náiade calls *alecrim[^alecrim]*, of which they only carry the smell. My chalk seed was left on the porch too. We sit - some on the hammock, some on a bench, some on pillows on the floor. We drink tea and *polvilho* cookies. I ask again for the story of the house (seemingly it has been told during lunch, but I was too focused talking with Nysso).

She talks about the permaculture project, moving away from the city, the chauvinism found in the first village the settled in, the group of friends and the discovery of the plot of land we are in. Purchases made little by little.

When the conversation moves towards other subjects, I sum Náiade's words with what Nysso told me about his job. I see him reaching those isolated places in the *sertão*, speaking with *índios* and farmers on sustainable agriculture, right-to-land, preservation... I think about the trucks full of ore that speeded by us two nights before, raising dirt and dust (the paved road ended conveniently at the entrance of a north-american mine, but there must exist other veins further inland). Neither words or thoughts are enough. Nobody notices me, I hope. I cry a bit.

---

We stopped. Somebody is cold. I watch the road in the opposite direction from where we came. The pale earth allows you to discern it. Surrounding it, the profile of the closest plants blends with the one of the hills.

\- Go.

I hesitate. There is no light.

\- Fifty steps. Go.

I start counting. They are short steps but I reach the fiftieth. I can't see the others anymore. The cicadas chirrup loud. I observe the dark shadow on my left. I vaguely distingush some shrubs, then just the night. I stare at it.

Fear disappears suddenly. I put on a night beast's gaze and I find myself comfortable. I savour the darkness in front of me drawing feline, subtle, constant and sensual pleasure from it. I'm in love.

One step and I vanish into the night.

---

In the morning, a few hours before we leave, Náiade and Nysso offers me internet access to work. They warn me that the radio connection is affected by the wind: it drops if the antenna shakes too much.

When, after the daily meeting, I'm out on the porch again, I glimpse from the East over the closest mountain tops the swirls of a couple of *carcará*, the eagles of the *serrado*.

[^alecrim]: Rosemary